Press Release
2nd April, 2025
Accra
Government of Ghana convenes National Landscape Forum on Natural Resource Management
and Forest Economy for inclusive and sustainable growth
The Government of Ghana (GoG), with support from the World Bank, has organized a 3-day National
Landscape Forum, a programme which aimed to bring together professionals and interested persons
from public, private and non-governmental agencies working in the areas of natural resources
management (NRM) and environmental sustainability in Ghana, The forum showcased project results,
facilitated dialogue in specific areas of concern, discussed opportunities for synergies across NRM
sectors to achieve stronger impacts, as well as pathways towards harnessing forest-based economy for
sustainable economic prosperity.
Currently, the main environmental challenges in Ghana include deforestation, land and landscape
degradation, pollution, coastal degradation, and depletion of fish stocks, with the country’s economic
and human development also vulnerable to climate change and climate-related shocks. The GoG,
however, has rolled out several programs to support the sustainable management of its natural resources
and environmental restoration, which have been supported by the World Bank through several
investment projects, technical assistance, and a carbon finance programme.
Good resource management should be based on data. The Natural Capital Accounting (NCA)
programme, with support from the World Bank’s Global Program on Sustainability, has supported the
Government in developing the land accounts, the ecosystem extent accounts, and the ecosystem services
accounts, using the System of Environmental-Economic Accounting (SEEA). These accounts present
changes in land and ecosystem cover and provide physical and monetary value estimates for some of
the ecosystem services. Data from these accounts has already been used to develop guidelines for
mainstreaming biodiversity into national development planning and to further analyze nexus between
poverty and natural capital.
Ghana has a lot to showcase in terms of inclusive and sustainable natural resources management. Ghana
is one of the Africa champions on Reducing Emission from Deforestation and Forest Degradation
(REDD+), as well as one of the first countries globally to receive carbon payments from the World
Bank for emissions reductions generated in the cocoa forest mosaic landscape through propagation of
the shaded cocoa systems. Additionally, Ghana’s integrated landscape management approaches have
been piloted by the Ministry of Environment, Science and Technology (MEST) and the Ministry of
Lands and Natural Resources (MLNR) under the Ghana Sustainable Land and Water Management
Project and Forest Investment Program (FIP). These flagship projects helped consolidate
implementation experience related to integrated and participatory landscape management, support
policy reforms and institutional strengthening in the forestry sector, and pilot many new approaches to
sustainable land and water management (SLWM) and community management of natural resources,
creation of the community-based governance structures for forest management, and community
engagement and empowerment, including scale up of CREMAs in the cocoa forest landscape. These
investments have reached over 130,000 beneficiaries with knowledge and inputs related to adoption of
Official Use Only

SLWM, sustainable forest management practices and developed significant SLWM extension capacity
in Northern Ghana, the most climate sensitive and poorest part of the country.
The Government of Ghana has capitalized on previous successes to advance sustainable landscape and
forest management practices within the Northern Savannah Zone and Cocoa Forest Landscape.
Supported by the World Bank through investments, technical assistance, and analytics, the Government
of Ghana is implementing several initiatives in the natural resources sector aimed at achieving inclusive
and sustainable growth. These initiatives include reforming policies and institutions, strengthening
community-based governance structures for forest management, promoting environmentally
sustainable cocoa production, providing additional livelihoods for forest and rural communities,
supporting efforts to formalize small-scale mining, and support mercury-free practices. Additionally,
the government is enhancing coastal community resilience against erosion, flooding, and pollution
across multiple districts. By leveraging its investments in forests, the government has secured result-
based carbon payments amounting to over 20 million dollars, with 60% of the benefits allocated to
forest communities.
The 3-day forum officially launched and presented the results for the Natural Capital Accounts
developed under the NCA programme, discussed key issues in current projects, with expected outcomes
of increased intersectoral understanding of existing challenges and enhanced capacity to plan for future
interventions.
Hon. Murtala Mohammed, Minister for Environment, Science and Technology said “I am optimistic,
that the discussions we have engaged in will shape the policies and actions that determine the future of
our natural landscapes. We must work collectively - government, private sector, civil society and
academia, to mainstream biodiversity and natural capital accounting into decision-making processes.
Government's commitment to sustainable resource management will be critical in achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), Global Biodiversity Framework targets, Ghana’s Green
Growth Agenda and the aspirations of the Africa We Want under the African Union Agenda 2063.
Hon. Emmanuel Armah-Kofi Buah, the Minister of Lands and Natural Resources, expressed gratitude
to the World Bank for its continued support, stating “I must extend my sincere appreciation to the World
Bank team for their invaluable partnership with the government—a collaboration essential for national
development. This new administration remains firmly committed to the sustainable management of the
nation’s natural resources. We are optimistic that this forum will serve as the right platform to advance
this agenda, and we look forward to fostering even stronger partnerships moving forward.”
Speaking on behalf of the World Bank, Robert Taliercio, Division Director for Ghana, Liberia and
Sierra Leone congratulated the GoG on the launch and presentation of three natural capital accounts.
He said the Bank is pleased to support the GoG in its quest to manage the country’s natural resources
and create avenues for discussions of mutual concern. “This forum will focus on understanding sector
challenges, enhancing planning capacity and providing a platform for showcasing Ghana's successes
and addressing future opportunities in the context of global attention on forests”. He said.
The forum brought together various stakeholders from Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs),
Development Partners, Academia, Civil Society Organizations (CSOs), Traditional Authorities,
Research institutions and Think Tanks, as well as the media.
Official Use Only

For more information, please contact:
Mawusi Mawuenyefia
Director of Communications
Ministry of Lands & Natural Resources
+233 23 300 9135
Mrs. Gloria Holm-Graves
Head, Public Relations
Ministry of Environment, Science and Technology
gloria.holm-graves@mesti.gov.gh
+233-24-358-5322
Official Use Only

